CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md, before:

# Code of Conduct

## Statement on Diversity and Inclusion

Our goal is to create an open and welcoming environment where all team members feel comfortable contributing, making mistakes, and learning together, regardless of background, level of experience, age, disability, ethnicity, gender identity and expression, sexual orientation, nationality, personal appearance, race, or religion.

## Expected and Unacceptable Behaviour

Some examples of expected behavior include:

- provide kind, constructive, and actionable feedback
- be open and respectful of different ideas and points of view
- treat others with respect and empathy
- be collaborative: involve teammates in your work and thought processes, and ask for help and feedback often
- completely understand and fully cite all code produced by AI tools or adapted with permission from another source, and be able to discuss and explain all your code
- professional conduct in spoken and written language, including communication between team members as well as public facing writing for this project, such as written components of reports and Github Issues
- all communication should be in English
- write clear and concise Github Issues, commit messages, pull requests, PR feedback, and any other code communication
- document your code regularly, including function documentation and comments
- communicate frequently and promptly with team mates, especially if you encounter roadblocks or need support
- attend all labs and meetings, and communicate if you will be late or need to reschedule a meeting

Some examples of unacceptable behavior include:

- discrimination or harrassment
- unwelcoming or exclusive language or behavior, including sexualized language or imagery and insulting/derogatory comments
- any behavior that violates MDS policies
- excessive use of AI tools or adapted code from another source, use of AI tools or adapted code from another source without proper citation (plaigarism), and/or use of any code that you do not understand
- missing labs or meetings without communication, or frequently being more than 5 minutes late to labs or meetings
- taking more than 24 hours to respond to (or acknowledge with a timeline for response) messages while a lab is being worked on (i.e. Tuesday afternoon until Saturday at 6pm) without prior communication of limited availability

## Consequences for and Reporting Unacceptable Behavior

If a team member notes unaccetable behavior in another team member related to use of AI tools or adapted code, lack of communication, or missing labs/meetings, they should attempt to provide one warning to said team member and/or initiate a group discussion with all team members, before taking the issues to the teaching team. 

The team member will have 24 hours to fix the issue (e.g. replace the affected code, add sufficient citation to their code, increase communication, or demonstrate consistent attendance at future meetings (may take more than 24 hours)). Said team member may be assigned additional work to compensate for the time and effort that their team mates put in to identify and resolve any code issues, or work that a team member was unable to complete due to waiting on their communcation/their lack of attendance in lab/meetings. For a code/plaigarism issue, said team member may continue to be assigned additional work long-term such that other team members have more time to review their work. Unacceptable behaviors that are corrected after the first warning can still be mentioned in peer evaluations, which may have grading consequences at the discretion of the teaching team.

If a team member notes any other unacceptable behavior, is uncomfortable providing or for any other reason unable to provide a first warning or discuss with other group members, or the unacceptable behavior is not sufficiently addressed or persists after the first warning, the team will involve the teaching team, who may invoke disciplinary or grading action.

Commit message:

completed second draft of code of conduct: added more generic sections from the breast cancer predictor code of conduct with attribution

CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md, after:

# Code of Conduct

## Statement on Diversity and Inclusion

Our goal is to create an open and welcoming environment where all team members feel comfortable contributing, making mistakes, and learning together, regardless of background, level of experience, age, disability, ethnicity, gender identity and expression, sexual orientation, nationality, personal appearance, race, or religion.

## Expected and Unacceptable Behaviour

Some examples of expected behavior include:

- use welcoming and inclusive language
- provide kind, constructive, and actionable feedback
- be open and respectful of different ideas and points of view
- treat others with respect and empathy
- be collaborative: involve teammates in your work and thought processes, and ask for help and feedback often
- completely understand and fully cite all code produced by AI tools or adapted with permission from another source, and be able to discuss and explain all your code
- professional conduct in spoken and written language, including communication between team members as well as public facing writing for this project, such as written components of reports and Github Issues
- all communication should be in English
- write clear and concise Github Issues, commit messages, pull requests, PR feedback, and any other code communication
- document your code regularly, including function documentation and comments
- communicate frequently and promptly with team mates, especially if you encounter roadblocks or need support
- attend all labs and meetings, and communicate if you will be late or need to reschedule a meeting

Some examples of unacceptable behavior include:

- discrimination or harrassment
- unwelcoming or exclusive language or behavior, including sexualized language or imagery and insulting/derogatory comments
- any behavior that violates MDS policies
- excessive use of AI tools or adapted code from another source, use of AI tools or adapted code from another source without proper citation (plaigarism), and/or use of any code that you do not understand
- missing labs or meetings without communication, or frequently being more than 5 minutes late to labs or meetings
- taking more than 24 hours to respond to (or acknowledge with a timeline for response) messages while a lab is being worked on (i.e. Tuesday afternoon until Saturday at 6pm) without prior communication of limited availability

## Our Responsibilities

Project maintainers are responsible for clarifying the standards of acceptable behavior and are expected to take appropriate and fair corrective action in response to any instances of unacceptable behavior.

Project maintainers have the right and responsibility to remove, edit, or reject comments, commits, code, wiki edits, issues, and other contributions that are not aligned to this Code of Conduct, or to ban temporarily or permanently any contributor for other behaviors that they deem inappropriate, threatening, offensive, or harmful.

## Scope

This Code of Conduct applies both within project spaces and in public spaces when an individual is representing the project or its community. Examples of representing a project or community include using an official project e-mail address, posting via an official social media account, or acting as an appointed representative at an online or offline event. Representation of a project may be further defined and clarified by project maintainers.

## Enforcement

If a team member notes unaccetable behavior in another team member related to use of AI tools or adapted code, lack of communication, or missing labs/meetings, they should attempt to provide one warning to said team member and/or initiate a group discussion with all team members, before taking the issues to the teaching team.

The team member will have 24 hours to fix the issue (e.g. replace the affected code, add sufficient citation to their code, increase communication, or demonstrate consistent attendance at future meetings (may take more than 24 hours)). Said team member may be assigned additional work to compensate for the time and effort that their team mates put in to identify and resolve any code issues, or work that a team member was unable to complete due to waiting on their communcation/their lack of attendance in lab/meetings. For a code/plaigarism issue, said team member may continue to be assigned additional work long-term such that other team members have more time to review their work. Unacceptable behaviors that are corrected after the first warning can still be mentioned in peer evaluations, which may have grading consequences at the discretion of the teaching team.

If a team member notes any other unacceptable behavior, is uncomfortable providing or for any other reason unable to provide a first warning or discuss with other group members, or the unacceptable behavior is not sufficiently addressed or persists after the first warning, the team will involve the teaching team, who may invoke disciplinary or grading action.

Instances of unacceptable behavior by contributors outside of the project team can be reported by contacting the project team at <molkess@student.ubc.ca>. The project team will review and investigate all complaints, and will respond in a way that it deems appropriate to the circumstances. The project team is obligated to maintain confidentiality with regard to the reporter of an incident. Further details of specific enforcement policies may be posted separately.

Project maintainers who do not follow or enforce the Code of Conduct in good faith may face temporary or permanent repercussions as determined by other members of the project's leadership.

## Attribution

Sections of this Code of Conduct have been adapted from the [Breast Cancer Predictor Code of Conduct](https://github.com/ttimbers/breast_cancer_predictor_py?tab=coc-ov-file), which was copied from the tidyverse Code of Conduct, which was adapted from the Contributor Covenant, version 1.4, available at <http://contributor-covenant.org/version/1/4>.
